STATE OF CALIFORNIA – CALIFORNIA NATURAL RESOURCES AGENCY GAVIN NEWSOM, GOVERNOR
CALIFORNIA COASTAL COMMISSION
455 MARKET STREET, SUITE 300
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94105-2421
VOICE (415) 904-5200
FAX (415) 904-5400
To: Planning Directors of Coastal Cities and Counties
From: John Ainsworth, Executive Director, California Coastal Commission
Date: January 21, 2022
RE: Updates Regarding the Implementation of New ADU Laws
_____________________________________________________________________________________
I. Introduction
California’s ongoing housing crisis continues to exacerbate housing inequity and affordability,
especially in the coastal zone. To address this critical issue, the state Legislature has enacted a
number of laws in the last several years that are designed to reduce barriers to providing
housing and to encourage construction of additional housing units in appropriate locations. To
this end, the 2019 legislative session resulted in a series of changes to state housing laws that
facilitate the development of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) and Junior Accessory Dwelling
Units (JADUs), which can help provide additional housing units that can be more affordable
than other forms of market rate housing. Importantly, the changes did not modify existing
provisions of state housing law that explicitly recognize that local governments must still abide
by the requirements of the Coastal Act, and by extension, Local Coastal Programs (LCPs). Thus,
provisions on coastal resource protection must be incorporated into the planning and
development process, and into updated LCP J/ADU requirements, when considering J/ADUs in
the coastal zone.
The Coastal Commission strongly encourages local governments to update their LCPs with
J/ADU provisions in a manner that harmonizes the State’s housing laws with the Coastal Act.
Doing so would protect the State’s coastal resources while also reducing barriers to
constructing J/ADUs and helping to promote more affordable coastal housing.
The Coastal Commission has previously circulated three memos to assist local governments
with understanding how to carry out their Coastal Act obligations while also implementing state
requirements regarding the regulation of J/ADUs. These memos have raised some questions for
local governments, including the manner in which they are to be understood together. In order
to address this issue, and to reflect lessons learned regarding J/ADU regulation in the coastal
zone in the past few years, this updated memo supersedes and replaces these prior memos.
This updated memo also elaborates on the changes to state housing laws that went into effect
on January 1, 2020 and provides further information to help local governments harmonize
these laws with the Coastal Act. This memo will briefly discuss the authority that the Coastal Act
grants the Commission and local governments over housing in the coastal zone, new legislation
regarding J/ADUs, how local governments can streamline J/ADU applications under the Coastal
Act, and some key issues that should be considered when LCP amendments for J/ADU
2
provisions are undertaken. This memo is intended to provide general guidance for local
governments with fully certified LCPs. The Coastal Commission is responsible for Coastal Act
review of J/ADUs in most areas that are not subject to a fully certified LCP. Local governments
that have questions about specific circumstances not addressed in this memo should contact
the appropriate district office of the Commission.
II. Coastal Act Authority Regarding Housing in the Coastal Zone
The Coastal Act has a variety of provisions directly related to housing. Relevant here, the
Coastal Act does not negate local government compliance with state and federal law “with
respect to providing low- and moderate-income housing, replacement housing, relocation
benefits, or any other obligation related to housing imposed by existing law or any other law
hereafter enacted.” (Pub. Res. Code § 30007.) The Coastal Act also requires the Coastal
Commission to encourage housing opportunities for low- and moderate-income households
(Pub. Res. Code § 30604(f)) but states that “[n]o local coastal program shall be required to
include housing policies and programs. (Pub. Res. Code § 30500.1.) Finally, new residential
development must be “located within, contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing
developed areas able to accommodate it” or in other areas where development will not have
significant adverse effects on coastal resources. (Pub. Res. Code § 30250.)
While the Commission does not currently have the explicit authority to provide or protect
affordable housing in the coastal zone, the Commission has continued to preserve existing
density and affordable housing whenever possible, including by supporting and encouraging the
creation of J/ADUs. The creation of new J/ADUs in existing residential areas is one of many
strategies that aims to increase the housing stock, including creating additional housing units of
a type and size that can be more affordable than other forms of housing in the coastal zone, in
a way that may be able to avoid significant adverse impacts on coastal resources.
III. Overview of New Legislation
As of January 1, 2020, AB 68, AB 587, AB 881, AB 670, AB 671, and SB 13 collectively updated
existing Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 concerning local government review
and approval of J/ADUs, and as of January 1, 2021, AB 3182 further updated the same laws,
with the goal of increasing statewide availability of smaller, and potentially more affordable,
housing units. Importantly, some of the changes affect local governments in the coastal zone
and are summarized below.
• Local governments continue to have the discretion to adopt J/ADU provisions that are
consistent with state law, and they may include specific requirements for protecting
coastal resources and addressing issues such as design guidelines and protection of
historic structures.
• Outside of an LCP context, existing or new J/ADU provisions that do not meet the
requirements of the new legislation are null and void and will be substituted with the
3
provisions of Section 65852.2(a) until the local government comes into compliance with
new provisions. (Gov. Code § 65852.2(a)(4).) However, existing J/ADU provisions
contained in certified LCPs are not superseded by Government Code Section 65852.2
and continue to apply to Coastal Development Permit (CDP) applications for J/ADUs
until the LCP is modified. Coastal jurisdictions without any J/ADU provisions or with
existing J/ADU provisions that were adopted prior to January 1, 2020 are encouraged to
update their LCPs to comply with the State’s new laws. Such new or updated LCP
provisions need to ensure that new J/ADUs will protect coastal resources in the manner
required by the Coastal Act and LCP, including, for example, by ensuring that new
J/ADUs are not constructed in locations where they would require the construction of
shoreline protective devices, in environmentally sensitive habitat areas and wetlands, or
in areas where the J/ADU’s structural stability may be compromised by bluff erosion,
flooding, or wave uprush over the structure’s lifetime.
• A major change to Section 65852.2 is that the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) now has an oversight role to ensure that local J/ADU
provisions are consistent with state law. If a local government adopts an ordinance that
HCD deems to be non-compliant with state law, HCD can notify the Office of the
Attorney General. (Gov. Code § 65852.2(h)(3).) To ensure a smooth process, local
governments should submit their draft J/ADU provisions to HCD and Coastal
Commission staff to review for housing law and Coastal Act consistency before they are
adopted locally and should continue to foster a three-way dialogue regarding any
potential issues identified. Additionally, Coastal Commission and HCD staff meet
regularly to discuss and resolve any issues that arise in the development of J/ADU
provisions in the coastal zone. The Commission continues to prioritize J/ADU LCP
amendments, and some may qualify for streamlined review as minor or de minimis
amendments. (Pub. Res. Code § 30514(d); 14 Cal. Code Regs. § 13554.)
• In non-coastal zone areas, local governments are required to provide rapid, ministerial
approval or disapproval of applications for permits to create J/ADUs, regardless of
whether the local government has adopted updated J/ADU provisions. (Gov. Code §
65852.2(a)(3).) In the coastal zone, CDPs are still necessary in most cases to comply with
LCP requirements (see below); however, a local public hearing is not required, and local
governments are encouraged to streamline J/ADU processes as much as feasible.
Other recent legislative changes clarify that local J/ADU provisions may not require a minimum
lot size; owner occupancy of an ADU (though if there is an ADU and a JADU, one of them must
be owner-occupied); fire sprinklers if such sprinklers are not required in the primary dwelling; a
maximum square footage of less than 850 square feet for an ADU (or 1,000 square feet if the
ADU contains more than one bedroom); and in some cases, off-street parking. Section
65852.2(a) lists additional mandates for local governments that choose to adopt a J/ADU
4
ordinance, all of which set the “maximum standards that local agencies shall use to evaluate a
proposed [ADU] on a lot that includes a proposed or existing single-family dwelling.” (Gov. Code
§ 65852.2(a)(6).) As indicated above, in specific cases coastal resource considerations may
negate some such requirements, but only when tied to a coastal resource impact that would
not be allowed under the Coastal Act and/or the LCP. In recent LCP amendments, these types of
considerations have most often arisen in terms of the off-street parking provisions (see below).
IV. General Guidance for Reviewing J/ADU Applications
The following section lays out the general permitting pathway in which local governments can
process J/ADU applications in a manner that is consistent with Coastal Act requirements and
LCP provisions.
1) Check prior CDP history for the site.
Determine whether a CDP or other form of Coastal Act/LCP authorization was previously
issued for development of the site and whether that CDP and/or authorization limits, or
requires a CDP or CDP amendment for, changes to the approved development or for future
development or uses of the site. The applicant should contact the appropriate Coastal
Commission district office if a Commission-issued CDP and/or authorization affects the
applicant’s ability to apply for a J/ADU.
2) Determine whether the proposed J/ADU constitutes “development.”
As defined by the Coastal Act, development refers to both “the placement or erection of
any solid material or structure” on land as well as any “change[s] in the density or intensity
of use of land[.]” (Pub. Res. Code § 30106.) Most J/ADUs constitute development if they
include, for example, new construction of a detached ADU, new construction of an attached
J/ADU, or conversion of an existing, uninhabitable, attached or detached space to a J/ADU
(such as a garage, storage area, basement, or mechanical room). The construction of new
structures constitutes the “placement or erection of solid material,” and the conversion of
existing, uninhabitable space would generally constitute a “change in the density or
intensity of use.” Therefore, these activities would generally constitute development in the
coastal zone that requires a CDP or other authorization. (Pub. Res. Code § 30600.)
Unlike new construction, the conversion of an existing, legally established habitable space
to a J/ADU within an existing residence, without removal or replacement of major structural
components (e.g., roofs, exterior walls, foundations, etc.), and which does not change the
intensity of use of the structure, may not constitute development within the definition in
the Coastal Act. An example of a repurposed, habitable space that may not constitute new
development (and thus does not require Coastal Act or LCP authorization) is the conversion
of an existing bedroom within a primary structure. 

Previously circulated Commission J/ADU memos (being superseded and replaced by this
memo) indicated that construction or conversion of a J/ADU contained within or directly
attached to an existing single-family residence (SFR) may qualify as development that
was exempt from the requirement to obtain a CDP. Specifically, the Coastal Act and the
Commission’s implementing regulations identify certain improvements to existing SFRs
that are allowed to be exempted from CDP requirements (Pub. Res. Code § 30610(a); 14
Cal. Code Regs § 13250.) Although the Commission has previously certified some LCP
amendments that permitted certain exemptions for such ADU development, in a recent
action, the Commission reevaluated its position and found that “the creation of a selfcontained living unit, in the form of an ADU, is not an ‘improvement’ to an existing SFR.
Rather, it is the creation of a new residence. This is true regardless of whether the new
ADU is attached to the existing SFR or is in a detached structure on the same property.” 1
On this basis, and based on the finding that a variety of types of J/ADUs—including both
attached and detached J/ADUs—could have coastal resource impacts that make
exemptions inappropriate, it rejected the local government’s proposed exemptions for
certain J/ADUs. Local governments considering updating LCP J/ADU provisions should
consider the Commission’s recent stance regarding exemptions for ADUs and may work
with Commission staff to determine the best way to proceed on this issue.

3) If the proposed J/ADU constitutes development, determine whether a CDP waiver or
other type of expedited processing is appropriate.
If a local government’s LCP includes a waiver provision, and the proposed J/ADU meets the
criteria for a CDP waiver, the local government may issue a CDP waiver for the proposed
J/ADU. The Commission has generally allowed a CDP waiver for proposed J/ADUs if the
Executive Director determines that the proposed development is de minimis (i.e., it is
development that has no potential for any individual or cumulative adverse effect on
coastal resources and is consistent with all Chapter 3 policies of the Coastal Act). Such a
finding can typically be made when the proposed J/ADU project has been sited, designed,
and limited in such a way as to ensure any potential impacts to coastal resources are
avoided (such as through habitat and/or hazards setbacks, provision of adequate off-street
parking to ensure that public access to the coast is not impacted, etc.). (See Pub. Res. Code
§ 30624.7.) Projects that qualify for a CDP waiver typically allow for a reduced evaluation
framework and streamlined approval.

Most, if not all, LCPs with CDP waiver provisions do not allow for waivers in areas where
local CDP decisions are appealable to the Coastal Commission. There have been a variety of
reasons for this in the past, including that the Commission’s regulations require that local
governments hold a public hearing for all applications for appealable development (14 Cal.
Code Regs § 13566), and also that development in such areas tends to raise more coastal
resource concerns and that waivers may therefore not be appropriate. However, under the
state’s J/ADU provisions, public hearings are not required for qualifying development. 
Because of this, the above-described public hearing issue would not be a concern, so it
could be appropriate for LCPs to allow CDP waivers in both appealable and non-appealable
areas at least related to this criterion. Local governments should consult with Commission
staff should they consider proposing CDP waiver provisions in their LCP. Any LCP
amendment applications that propose to allow waivers in appealable areas should ensure
that there are appropriate procedures for notifying the public and the Commission
regarding approvals of individual, appealable waivers (such as Final Local Action Notices) so
that the proper appeal period can be set, and any appeals received are properly considered.
The Coastal Act also provides for other streamlined processing for certain types of
development, including for minor development. (Pub. Res. Code § 30624.9.) In certain
cases, categories of development can also be excluded from CDP requirements if certain
criteria are met (see box). In any case, local governments without such CDP waiver and
other processing and streamlining tools are encouraged to work with Commission staff to
amend their LCP to include such measures.
Coastal Act section 30610(e) allows certain categories of development that are specified
in Commission-approved Categorical Exclusion (Cat Ex) Orders to be excluded from CDP
requirements, provided that the category of development has no potential for any
significant adverse effect, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources. (See
also 14 Cal. Code Regs §§ 13240 et seq.)
Cat Ex Orders apply to specific types of development within identified geographical
locations. For example, the Commission may approve a Categorical Exclusion for J/ADUs
that would normally require a CDP (i.e., it is defined as development) because that
specific development type in that specific geographic area can be demonstrated to not
result in individual and/or cumulative coastal resource impacts. Cat Ex Orders are
prohibited from applying to: tide and submerged lands; beaches; lots immediately
adjacent to the inland extent of any beach; lots immediately adjacent of the mean high
tide line of the sea where there is no beach; and public trust lands.
Cat Ex Orders provide another potential means of streamlining J/ADU consideration, and
interested local governments should consult with Commission staff if they intend to
propose such an Order. Cat Ex Orders are processed separately from LCP amendments,
require a 2/3 vote of the Commission to be approved, and are typically subject to
conditions. Once approved, the local government is responsible for reviewing
development that might be subject to the Cat Ex Order and is typically required to report
any exclusions applied pursuant to the Order to the Commission for review by the
Executive Director and for an appeal period before they can become effective. It is
important to note that while Cat Ex Orders can be a powerful tool if approved, the
Commission must be able to conclude that the specific category of development in a
specific geographic area has no potential for any significant adverse coastal resources
impacts in order to approve one. Thus, the local government pursuing a Cat Ex Order
must provide supporting documentation and evidence that can conclusively show that to
be the case.
7
4) If a full CDP is required, review CDP application for consistency with certified LCP
requirements.
If a proposed J/ADU constitutes development and cannot be processed as a waiver or
similar expedited Coastal Act approval authorized in the certified LCP, it requires a CDP. The
CDP must be consistent with the requirements of the certified LCP and, where applicable,
the public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act. The local government must then
provide the required public notice for any CDP applications for J/ADUs and process the
application pursuant to LCP requirements, but should process it within the time limits
contained in the ADU law, if feasible. However, local governments are not required to hold
a public hearing on CDPs for ADUs. (Gov. Code § 65852.2(l).) Once the local government has
issued a decision, it must send the required final local action notice to the appropriate
district office of the Commission. If the CDP is appealable, a local government action to
approve a CDP for the ADU may be appealed to the Coastal Commission. (Pub. Res. Code §
30603.)
V. Key Considerations
Per Government Code Section 65852.2, subd. (l), known as the Coastal Act Savings Clause, the
State’s new ADU requirements shall not be “construed to supersede or in any way alter or
lessen the effect or application of the California Coastal Act of 1976.” There are a number of
key issues that local governments should account for in order to ensure their LCP J/ADU
provisions are consistent with the requirements in the Coastal Act. This section addresses some
of the key issues that the Commission has dealt with recently, including public coastal access
parking requirements and protection of sensitive habitats and visual qualities. Local
governments are encouraged to contact their local Coastal Commission district office for
further assistance.
Protection of public recreational access in relation to parking requirements
Government Code Section 65852.2 requirements regarding parking for J/ADUs are as follows:
a. One parking space is required per unit or per bedroom, whichever is less. The parking
space can be a tandem space in an existing driveway.
b. When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with
the construction of an ADU, no replacement parking space(s) are required.
However, Section 65852.2 further stipulates that the parking requirements listed above do not
apply to ADUs constructed:
a. Within ½ mile walking distance of public transportation stops/routes;
b. Within a historic district;
c. Within a primary residence or accessory structure;
d. When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the
ADU;
8
e. And where a car-share vehicle is located within one block of the ADU.
Thus, the Government Code limits the circumstances when a local government can require a
J/ADU project to address its parking needs onsite. This is a departure from most local
government parking requirements which often explicitly specify the number of off-street
parking spaces that must be provided onsite in any particular development, including
residential development. The potential outcome is that private residential J/ADU parking needs
can be shifted onto adjacent public streets. At the same time, the Coastal Act contains
objectives and policies designed to protect and provide for maximum coastal access
opportunities, which includes maintaining sufficient public coastal parking, including as
implemented through LCP off-street parking provisions. The addition of J/ADUs may interfere
with coastal public street parking availability if, for example, a garage is converted to a J/ADU
and parking is not replaced onsite, in addition to the J/ADU parking demand itself. The
Commission has often found that when private residential parking needs are not
accommodated onsite, it can lead to increased use of on-street parking to address such needs,
thereby reducing the availability of on-street parking to the general public. This may adversely
affect public coastal access if it occurs in high visitor-serving areas and/or areas with significant
public recreational access opportunities, and where on-street parking is heavily used. The result
will be that the general public could be displaced from on-street parking by J/ADU parking
needs, which may violate the Coastal Act’s requirements to protect, provide, and maximize
public coastal access and recreational opportunities. In many impacted coastal neighborhoods,
development patterns over the years have not adequately accounted for off-street parking
needs, and adding J/ADU parking to the mix will only exacerbate such public parking difficulties.
Additionally, because general on-street parking is typically free or lower cost compared to other
public parking facilities, J/ADU construction may also interfere with maintaining lower cost
coastal access for all.
In order to avoid conflicts regarding parking requirements for J/ADUs as they may impact public
access, local governments are encouraged to work with Commission staff to identify or map
specific neighborhoods and locations where there is high visitor demand for public on-street
parking needed for coastal access and to specify parking requirements for each such area that
harmonizes Government Code requirements with the Coastal Act (and any applicable LCP
policies). These maps can denote areas that supply important coastal public parking and access
opportunities, and require that J/ADU development in these areas ensure that private
residential parking needs are accommodated off-street. Importantly, such upfront LCP mapping
and provisions allow the local government to address impacts to public access and parking
supply without the need for a protracted, or even necessarily a discretionary, decision. The
Commission has previously found that local governments may include specific off-street parking
requirements for J/ADUs constructed in these locations and may also require maintenance of
all off-street parking for the primary residence (see examples below). However, harmonizing
the distinct priorities between the Coastal Act’s protection of public coastal access and the
J/ADU provisions on parking requirements will require a case-by-case consideration of the
specific circumstances of each jurisdiction.
9
Protection of sensitive habitats and visual qualities; avoidance of hazards
While most J/ADU projects take place within established residential neighborhoods where
potential coastal resource impacts are fairly limited, there can be cases where such projects
may affect significant coastal resources, such as sensitive habitats and shorelines and beaches.
As a general rule, LCPs include many provisions protecting such resources, and it is important
that proposed J/ADU provisions are not structured to undo any such LCP protections that
already apply. J/ADUs may need to be reviewed for specific siting and design standards,
particularly in visually sensitive areas (such as the immediate shoreline, between the first public
road and the sea, near LCP-designated scenic areas, etc.). Similarly, where sensitive habitat may
be present, J/ADUs must be reviewed for impacts to such habitat, including with respect to fuel
modification for defensible space. Additionally, local governments should include provisions for
J/ADUs constructed in areas vulnerable to sea level rise and other coastal hazards which ensure
not only that these structures will meet all LCP requirements for new development to be safe
from such hazards, but that also addresses the need for future sea level rise adaptations
(including future accommodation or removal, risk disclosure conditions on the J/ADU, and any
other risk-related issues dealt with in the LCP).
VI. Examples of Recently Updated ADU Provisions in Certified LCPs
A number of local jurisdictions have recently updated their LCPs to include new J/ADU
provisions. Coastal Commission staff reports are linked below, which summarize specific issues
that arose between Coastal Act requirements and the new J/ADU provisions as well as the
necessary changes that were made in order to harmonize each jurisdiction’s LCP with the
State’s housing laws. The suggested modifications shown in the staff reports were all approved
by the Coastal Commission.
City of Santa Cruz (approved May 2021). This LCP amendment included clarifying language to
address which provisions of the new state housing laws applied to ADUs in the coastal zone of
the City of Santa Cruz as well as ensuring that the coastal resource protection provisions of the
City’s current LCP are maintained. The amendment also addressed specific off-street parking
requirements for ADUs sited near significant coastal visitor destinations. The City of Santa Cruz
adopted the Commission’s modifications in August 2021.
City of Pacifica (approved June 2021). This LCP amendment revised the City’s Implementation
Plan to incorporate J/ADU provisions that are in line with the updated state housing laws,
including streamlined procedures for J/ADU review and permitting processing, providing J/ADU
development standards, and crafting tailored modifications to address specific public access
parking needs in key visitor destination areas. The City of Pacifica adopted the Commission’s
modifications in August 2021.
County of San Mateo (approved July 2021). This LCP amendment incorporated more specific
ADU regulations relating to size limits, maximum number of J/ADUs permitted per lot,
streamlined review and process of J/ADU permits, and parking availability in areas that are
10
significant coastal visitor destinations. The County of San Mateo adopted the Commission’s
modifications in September 2021.
City of Encinitas (approved August 2021). The Coastal Commission approved revisions to the
City of Encinitas’ Implementation Plan that updated existing definitions for ADUs and JADUs
and clarified development standards for accessory units, including standards for size, height,
and setbacks.
City of Santa Barbara (approved December 2021). The Coastal Commission approved
Commission staff’s revision of the City of Santa Barbara’s LCP amendment submittal addressing
updated ADU provisions to be consistent with state housing laws. The amendment revised
J/ADU terms and definitions, building standards, parking requirements, and permitting review
and processing procedures. The staff report included modifications that address the CDP
exemption issue (discussed above).